Monsieur Rick?
Yes?
How did you get in here? You're under age.
I came with Captain Renault.
I should have known.
My husband is with me, too.
No, of course not. Do you mind if I do?
Monsieur Rick, what kind of man is Captain Renault?
Oh, he's just like any other man, only more so.
No, I mean, is he trustworthy? Is his word --
-- Now, just a minute. Who told you to ask me that?
He did. Captain Renault did.
I thought so. Where's your husband?
How long have you been married?
Eight weeks. We come from Bulgaria. Oh, things are very bad there, Monsieur. A devil has the people by the throat. So, Jan and I, we, we do not want our children to grow up in such a country.
So you decided to go to America.
Yes, but we have not much money, and traveling is so expensive and difficult. It was much more than we thought to get here. And then Captain Renault sees us and he is so kind. He wants to help us.
Yes, I'll bet.
He tells me he can give us an exit visa, but we have no money.
Does he know that?
Oh, yes.
And he is still willing to give you a visa?
Yes, Monsieur.
And you want to know --
-- Will he keep his word?
Nobody ever loved me that much.
And he never knew, and the girl kept this bad thing locked in her heart? That would be all right, wouldn't it?
You want my advice?
Oh, yes, please.
Go back to Bulgaria.
Oh, but if you knew what it means to us to leave Europe, to get to America! Oh, but if Jan should find out! He is such a boy. In many ways I am so much older than he is.
Monsieur Rick, I --
Excuse me, but you look like a couple who are on their way to America.
You will find a market there for this ring. I am forced to sell it at a great sacrifice.
Thank you, but I hardly think --
Good.
What is your name?
Such a bargain. But that is your decision?
Mr. Berger, the ring, could I see it again?
Yes, Monsieur.
I recognize you from the news photographs, Monsieur Laszlo.
In a concentration camp, one is apt to lose a little weight.
We read five times that you were killed in five different places.
I see.
Monsieur Rick, may I get you a cup of coffee?
No thanks, Carl.
Well, you are in pretty good shape, Herr Rick.
How long can I afford to stay closed?
Oh, two weeks, maybe three.
Maybe I won't have to. A bribe has worked before. In the meantime, everybody stays on salary.
Now you finish locking up, will you, Carl?
I will. Then I am going to the meeting of the --
-- Don't tell me where you're going.
I won't.
Goodnight.
The police break up our meeting. Herr Rick! We escaped in the last moment.
Yes, I come.
I want you to turn out the light in the rear entrance. It might attract the police.
But Sacha always puts out that light --
-- Tonight he forgot.
I want you to take Miss Lund home.
Excuse me, Monsieur Rick, but a gentleman inside has won twenty thousand francs. The cashier would like some money.
Well, I'll get it from the safe.
I am so upset, Monsieur Rick. You know I can't understand --
-- Forget it, Emil. Mistakes like that happen all the time.
Here you are.
It shall not happen again, Monsieur.
Here's to you, sir.
Er, good luck, yes.
I'd better be going.
Er, my check, please.
Er, goodbye, sir.
Hello, Rick.
Hello, Ferrari. How's business at the Blue Parrot?
Fine, but I would like to buy your cafe.
It's not for sale.
You haven't heard my offer.
It's not for sale at any price.
What do you want for Sam?
I don't buy or sell human beings.
That's too bad. That's Casablanca's leading commodity. In refugees alone we could make a fortune if you would work with me through the black market.
Suppose you run your business and let me run mine.
Suppose we ask Sam. Maybe he'd like to make a change.
Suppose we do.
I see the bus is in. I'll take my shipment with me.
No hurry. I'll have it sent over. Have a drink with me.
I never drink in the morning. And every time you send my shipment over, it's always just a little bit short.
The bourbon.  The news about Ugarte upset me very much.
Of course not. What upsets me is the fact that Ugarte is dead and no one knows where those letters of transit are.
Practically no one.
If I could lay my hands on those letters, I could make a fortune.
So could I. And I'm a poor businessman.
I have a proposition for whoever has those letters. I will handle the entire transaction, get rid of the letters, take all the risk, for a small percentage.
And the carrying charges?
Naturally there will be a few incidental expenses. That is the proposition I have for whoever has those letters.
I'll tell him when he comes in.
Rick, I'll put my cards on the table. I think you know where those letters are.
That's why I came over here to give them a chance to ransack my place.
Shall we draw up the papers, or is our handshake good enough?
Ah, to get out of Casablanca and go to America! You're a lucky man.
Oh, by the way, my agreement with Sam's always been that he gets twenty- five percent of the profits. That still goes.
Hmmm. I happen to know that he gets ten percent. But he's worth twenty- five.
And Abdul and Carl and Sacha, they stay with the place, or I don't sell.
Of course they stay. Rick's wouldn't be Rick's without them.
Don't forget, you owe Rick's a hundred cartons of American cigarettes.
You see, my dear, the word has gone around.
As leader of all illegal activities in Casablanca, I am an influential and respected man. It would not be worth my life to do anything for Monsieur Laszlo. You, however, are a different matter.
I will stay here and keep on trying. I'm sure in a little while --
We've decided, Signor Ferrari. For the present we'll go on looking for two exit visas. Thank you very much.
I observe that you in one respect are a very fortunate man, Monsieur. I am moved to make one more suggestion, why, I do not know, because it cannot possibly profit me, but, have you heard about Signor Ugarte and the letters of transit?
Yes, something.
Do you know where they are?
Rick?
He is a difficult customer, that Rick. One never knows what he'll do or why. But it is worth a chance.
It was gracious of you to share it with me. Good day, Mademoiselle, Monsieur.
And Mademoiselle?
Mademoiselle, after this disturbance it is not safe for Laszlo to stay in Casablanca.
This morning you implied it was not safe for him to leave Casablanca.
That is also true, except for one destination, to return to occupied France.
Occupied France?
Uh huh. Under a safe conduct from me.
What value is that? You may recall what German guarantees have been worth in the past.
There are only two other alternatives for him.
What are they?
It is possible the French authorities will find a reason to put him in the concentration camp here.
And the other alternative?
-- It was "La Belle Aurore."
How nice. You remembered. But of course, that was the day the Germans marched into Paris.
Not an easy day to forget.
No.
I remember every detail. The Germans wore gray, you wore blue.
Say goodnight to Sam for me.
I will.
There's still nobody in the world who can play "As Time Goes By" like Sam.
Who are you really? And what were you before? What did you do and what did you think? Huh?
We said "no questions."
A franc for your thoughts.
In America they'd bring only a penny. I guess that's about all they're worth.
I'm willing to be overcharged. Tell me.
And I was wondering.
Yes?
Why I'm so lucky. Why I should find you waiting for me to come along.
Why there is no other man in my life?
Uh huh.
That's easy. There was. He's dead.
I'm sorry for asking. I forgot we said "no questions."
Richard, they'll find out your record. It won't be safe for you here.
My German's a little rusty.
With the whole world crumbling, we pick this time to fall in love.
Yeah. It's pretty bad timing. Where were you, say, ten years ago?
Ten years ago? Let's see...  ...Yes. I was having a brace put on my teeth. Where were you?
Was that cannon fire, or is it my heart pounding?
Strange. I know so very little about you.
But be serious, darling. You are in danger and you must leave Paris.
No, no, no, no. We must leave.
Yes, of course, we --
-- The train for Marseilles leaves at five o'clock. I'll pick you up at your hotel at four-thirty.
No, no. Not at my hotel. I, uh, I have things to do in the city before I leave. I'll meet you at the station, huh?
That's too far ahead to plan.
Yes, I guess it is a little too far ahead. Well, let's see. What about the engineer? Why can't he marry us on the train?
Well, why not? The captain on a ship can. It doesn't seem fair that... Hey, hey, what's wrong, kid?
Oh. I saved my first drink to have with you. Here.
No. No, Rick. Not tonight.
Please.
Why did you have to come to Casablanca? There are other places.
I wouldn't have come if I had known that you were here. Believe me, Rick, it's true. I didn't know.
It's funny about your voice, how it hasn't changed. I can still hear it. "Richard dear, I'll go with you any place. We'll get on a train together and never stop."
Please don't. Don't, Rick. I can understand how you feel.
Huh! You understand how I feel. How long was it we had, honey?
I didn't count the days.
Can I tell you a story, Rick?
Has it got a wow finish?
I don't know the finish yet.
Well, go on, tell it. Maybe one will come to you as you go along.
It's about a girl who had just come to Paris from her home in Oslo. At the house of some friends she met a man about whom she'd heard her whole life, a very great and courageous man. He opened up for her a whole beautiful world full of knowledge and thoughts and ideals. Everything she knew or ever became was because of him. And she looked up to him and worshipped him with a feeling she supposed was love.
I'm sorry I was in no condition to receive you when you called on me last night.
Why did you come back? To tell me why you ran out on me at the railway station?
Yes.
Well, you can tell me now. I'm reasonably sober.
I don't think I will, Rick.
Why not? After all, I got stuck with a railway ticket. I think I'm entitled to know.
Last night I saw what has happened to you. The Rick I knew in Paris, I could tell him. He'd understand. But the one who looked at me with such hatred... well, I'll be leaving Casablanca soon and we'll never see each other again. We knew very little about each other when we were in love in Paris. If we leave it that way, maybe we'll remember those days and not Casablanca, not last night.
Did you run out on me because you couldn't take it? Because you knew what it would be like, hiding from the police, running away all the time?
You can believe that if you want to.
All the same, someday you'll lie to Laszlo. You'll be there.
How did you get in?
I told you this morning you'd come around, but this is a little ahead of schedule. Well, won't you sit down?
Richard, I had to see you.
You use "Richard" again? We're back in Paris.
Please.
Your unexpected visit isn't connected by any chance with the letters of transit? It seems that as long as I have those letters I'll never be lonely.
You can ask any price you want, but you must give me those letters.
I went through all that with your husband. It's no deal.
I know how you feel about me, but I'm asking you to put your feelings aside for something more important.
Do I have to hear again what a great man your husband is? What an important cause he's fighting for?
It was your cause, too. In your own way, you were fighting for the same thing.
Richard, Richard, we loved each other once. If those days meant anything at all to you --
-- I wouldn't bring up Paris if I were you. It's poor salesmanship.
Please. Please listen to me. If you knew what really happened, if you only knew the truth --
No. Oh, Richard, I'm sorry. I'm sorry, but, but you, you are our last hope. If you don't help us, Victor Laszlo will die in Casablanca.
-- All right. I tried to reason with you. I tried everything. Now I want those letters. Get them for me.
I don't have to. I've got them right here.
Put them on the table.
No.
For the last time, put them on the table.
And then?
It wasn't long after we were married that Victor went back to Czechoslovakia. They needed him in Prague, but there the Gestapo were waiting for him. Just a two-line item in the paper: "Victor Laszlo apprehended. Sent to concentration camp." I was frantic. For months I tried to get word. Then it came. He was dead, shot trying to escape. I was lonely. I had nothing. Not even hope. Then I met you.
Oh, it wasn't my secret, Richard. Victor wanted it that way. Not even our closest friends knew about our marriage. That was his way of protecting me. I knew so much about his work, and if the Gestapo found out I was his wife it would be dangerous for me and for those working with me.
When did you first find out he was alive?
Just before you and I were to leave Paris together. A friend came and told me that Victor was alive. They were hiding him in a freight car on the outskirts of Paris. He was sick, he needed me. I wanted to tell you, but I, I didn't care. I knew, I knew you wouldn't have left Paris, and the Gestapo would have caught you. So I... well, well, you know the rest.
Huh. But it's still a story without an ending. What about now?
Now? I don't know. I know that I'll never have the strength to leave you again.
And Laszlo?
Oh, you'll help him now, Richard, won't you? You'll see that he gets out? Then he'll have his work, all that he's been living for.
I can't fight it anymore. I ran away from you once. I can't do it again. Oh, I don't know what's right any longer. You'll have to think for both of us, for all of us.
All right, I will. Here's looking at you, kid.
Richard, Victor thinks I'm leaving with him. Haven't you told him?
No, not yet.
But it's all right, isn't it? You were able to arrange everything?
Everything is quite all right.
But why my name, Richard?
Because you're getting on that plane.
I don't understand. What about you?
No, Richard, no. What has happened to you? Last night we said --
-- Last night we said a great many things. You said I was to do the thinking for both of us. Well, I've done a lot of it since then and it all adds up to one thing. You're getting on that plane with Victor where you belong.
But Richard, no, I, I --
I'm saying it because it's true. Inside of us we both know you belong with Victor. You're part of his work, the thing that keeps him going. If that plane leaves the ground and you're not with him, you'll regret it.
No.
Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon, and for the rest of your life.
But what about us?
We'll always have Paris. We didn't have, we'd lost it, until you came to Casablanca. We got it back last night.
And I said I would never leave you.
Yes.
Hello, Sam.
It's been a long time.
Yes, ma'am. A lot of water under the bridge.
Some of the old songs, Sam.
Where is Rick?
When will he be back?
Not tonight no more. He ain't coming. Uh, he went home.
Does he always leave so early?
Oh, he never... well...  he's got a girl up at the Blue Parrot. He goes up there all the time.
You used to be a much better liar, Sam.
Leave him alone, Miss Ilsa. You're bad luck to him.
Play it once, Sam, for old time's sake.
I don't know what you mean, Miss Ilsa.
Play it, Sam. Play "As Time Goes By."
Victor, I, I feel somehow we shouldn't stay here.
You are very kind.
This time they really mean to stop me.
Victor, I'm afraid for you.
I must find out what Berger knows.
Be careful.
Goodnight.
Goodnight.
We are only interested in two visas, Signor.
Please, Ilsa, don't be hasty.
No, Ilsa, I won't let you stay here. You must get to America. And believe me, somehow I will get out and join you.
But, Victor, if the situation were different, if I had to stay and there were only a visa for one, would you take it?
Yes, I see. When I had trouble getting out of Lille, why didn't you leave me there? And when I was sick in Marseilles and held you up for two weeks and you were in danger every minute of the time, why didn't you leave me then?
He does. Could we have a table close to him?
What happened with Rick?
Our faithful friend is still there.
Victor, please, don't go to the underground meeting tonight.
Don't joke. After Major Strasser's warning tonight, I am frightened.
Whatever I'd say, you'd carry on. Victor, why don't you tell me about Rick? What did you find out?
Apparently he has the letters.
Yes?
Did he give any reason?
He suggested I ask you.
Ask me?
Ilsa, I --
-- Yes?
Yes, Victor, I was.
I know how it is to be lonely.  Is there anything you wish to tell me?
No, Victor, there isn't.
Yes, Yes I know. Victor, whatever I do, will you believe that I, that --
Be careful.
Are you ready Ilsa?
Captain, the boy who is playing the piano, somewhere I have seen him.
Sam?
Yes.
He came from Paris with Rick.
Rick? Who's he?
Mademoiselle, you are in Rick's and Rick is --
-- Is what?
Hello, Rick.
Well then, perhaps you also ---
I can't get over you two. She was asking about you earlier, Rick, in a way that made me extremely jealous.
I'm afraid Major Strasser would insist.
How do you do?
How do you do?
One hears a great deal about Rick in Casablanca.
And about Victor Laszlo everywhere.
And I congratulate you.
What for?
Your work.
Thank you. I try.
I hope we didn't overstay our welcome.
We'll come again.
Good morning.
Good evening.
Good evening. You see, here we are again.
Monsieur Blaine, I wonder if I could talk to you?
Go ahead.
Well, isn't there some other place? It's rather confidential, what I have to say.
My office.
You must know it's very important I get out of Casablanca. It's my privilege to be one of the leaders of a great movement. You know what I have been doing. You know what it means to the work, to the lives of thousands and thousands of people that I be free to reach America and continue my work.
I'm not interested in politics. The problems of the world are not in my department. I'm a saloon keeper.
My friends in the underground tell me that you have quite a record. You ran guns to Ethiopia. You fought against the fascists in Spain.
What of it?
Isn't it strange that you always happened to be fighting on the side of the underdog?
Are you enough of a businessman to appreciate an offer of a hundred thousand francs?
I appreciate it, but I don't accept it.
I'll raise it to two hundred thousand.
My friend, you could make it a million francs, or three, my answer would still be the same.
There must be some reason why you won't let me have them.
There is. I suggest that you ask your wife.
I beg your pardon?
I said, ask your wife.
Well, this might come in handy.
Thank you.
Had a close one, eh?
Don't you sometimes wonder if it's worth all this? I mean what you're fighting for?
We might as well question why we breathe. If we stop breathing, we'll die. If we stop fighting our enemies, the world will die.
You know how you sound, Monsieur Blaine? Like a man who's trying to convince himself of something he doesn't believe in his heart. Each of us has a destiny, for good or for evil.
I wonder if you do. I wonder if you know that you're trying to escape from yourself and that you'll never succeed.
You seem to know all about my destiny.
I know a good deal more about you than you suspect. I know, for instance, that you are in love with a woman. It is perhaps strange that we both should be in love with the same woman. The first evening I came here in this cafe, I knew there was something between you and Ilsa. Since no one is to blame, I, I demand no explanation. I ask only one thing. You won't give me the letters of transit. All right. But I want my wife to be safe. I ask you as a favor to use the letters to take her away from Casablanca.
You love her that much?
Monsieur Blaine, I don't know how to thank you.
I brought the money, Monsieur Blaine.
Keep it. You'll need it in America.
But we made a deal.
Oh, never mind about that. You won't have any trouble in Lisbon, will you?
No. It's all arranged.
Everything in order?
All except one thing. There's something you should know before you leave.
Monsieur Blaine, I don't ask you to explain anything.
I'm going to anyway, because it may make a difference to you later on. You said you knew about Ilsa and me.
Yes.
I understand.
Monsieur Laszlo, is it not?
Yes.
I am Captain Renault, Prefect of Police.
Yes. What is it you want?
Merely to welcome you to Casablanca and wish you a pleasant stay. It is not often we have so distinguished a visitor.
Thank you. I hope you'll forgive me, Captain, but the present French administration has not always been so cordial. May I present Miss Ilsa Lund?
No, Captain, please.
Let us say that it is my request. That is a much more pleasant word.
My bill.
Well! A precedent is being broken. Er, Emil!
Ricky, you're becoming quite human. I suppose we have to thank you for that, Mademoiselle.
Ilsa, I don't wish to be the one to say it, but it's late.
Tomorrow at ten at the Prefect's office.
We'll be there.
I am delighted to see you both. Did you have a good night's rest?
I slept very well.
That's strange. Nobody is supposed to sleep well in Casablanca.
May we proceed with the business?
With pleasure. Won't you sit down?
I am afraid not. My regrets, Monsieur.
And the honor of having served the Third Reich.
Monsieur, insofar as it is in my power --
-- Thank you.
By the way, Monsieur, last night you evinced an interest in Signor Ugarte.
Yes.
I believe you have a message for him?
I am making out the report now. We haven't quite decided whether he committed suicide or died trying to escape.
I'm sure you'll excuse me if I am not gracious, but you see, Major Strasser, I'm a Czechoslovakian.
I've never accepted that privilege, and I'm now on French soil.
I should like to discuss some matters arising from your presence on French soil.
This is hardly the time or the place.
Then we shall state another time and another place. Tomorrow at ten in the Prefect's office, with Mademoiselle.
Very well, Herr Laszlo, we will not mince words. You are an escaped prisoner of the Reich. So far you have been fortunate enough in eluding us. You have reached Casablanca. It is my duty to see that you stay in Casablanca.
Whether or not you succeed is, of course, problematical.
Is that all you wish to tell us?
Don't be in such a hurry. You have all the time in the world. You may be in Casablanca indefinitely... or you may leave for Lisbon tomorrow, on one condition.
And that is?
You know the leaders of the underground movement in Paris, in Prague, in Brussels, in Amsterdam, in Oslo, in Belgrade, in Athens.
Even in Berlin.
You will give us the names?
And what if you track down these men and kill them? What if you murdered all of us? From every corner of Europe, hundreds, thousands, would rise to take our places. Even Nazis can't kill that fast.
Herr Laszlo, you have a reputation for eloquence which I can now understand. But in one respect you are mistaken. You said the enemies of the Reich could all be replaced, but there is one exception. No one could take your place in the event anything unfortunate should occur to you while you were trying to escape.
For the time being.
Unoccupied France welcomes you to Casablanca.
Thank you, Captain. It's very good to be here.
You may find the climate of Casablanca a trifle warm, Major.
Oh, we Germans must get used to all climates, from Russia to the Sahara. But perhaps you were not referring to the weather.
What else, my dear Major?
By the way, the murder of the couriers, what has been done?
Oh, there is no hurry. Tonight he'll be at Rick's. Everybody comes to Rick's.
Good evening, gentlemen.
Thank you. It is a pleasure to have you here, Major.
Champagne and a tin of caviar.
May I recommend Veuve Cliquot '26, a good French wine.
Especially so tonight, Major. In a few minutes you will see the arrest of the man who murdered your couriers.
Rick, this is Major Heinrich Strasser of the Third Reich.
You repeat "Third Reich" as though you expected there to be others.
Well, personally, Major, I will take what comes.
Ho, diplomatist!
Rick is completely neutral about everything. And that takes in the field of women, too.
Of course, one must admit he has great courage.
You see, Major, you have nothing to worry about Rick.
Mademoiselle.
I strongly suspect that Ugarte left the letters of transit with Mr. Blaine. I would suggest you search the cafe immediately and thoroughly.
If Rick has the letters, he's much too smart to let you find them there.
You give him credit for too much cleverness. My impression was that he's just another blundering American.
As to Laszlo, we want him watched twenty-four hours a day.
You see, Captain, the situation is not as much under control as you believe.
Captain Renault, are you entirely certain which side you're on?
I have no conviction, if that's what you mean. I blow with the wind, and the prevailing wind happens to be from Vichy.
We are concerned about more than Casablanca. We know that every French province in Africa is honeycombed with traitors waiting for their chance, waiting, perhaps, for a leader.
A leader, like Laszlo?
Uh, huh. I have been thinking. It is too dangerous if we let him go. It may be too dangerous if we let him stay.
You see what I mean? If Laszlo's presence in a cafe can inspire this unfortunate demonstration, what more will his presence in Casablanca bring on? I advise that this place be shut up at once.
But everybody's having such a good time.
Yes, much too good a time. The place is to be closed.
But I have no excuse to close it.
What is the meaning of that phone call?
Why do you stand here? Why don't you stop him?
Hello, Louis.
You know, I think now I shall pay a call on Yvonne, maybe get her on the rebound, eh?
The plane to Lisbon.  You would like to be on it?
Why? What's in Lisbon?
It was a combination of all three.
And what in heaven's name brought you to Casablanca?
My health. I came to Casablanca for the waters.
Waters? What waters? We're in the desert.
I was misinformed.
Rick, there's going to be some excitement here tonight. We are going to make an arrest in your cafe.
What, again?
If you are thinking of warning him, don't put yourself out. He cannot possibly escape.
I stick my neck out for nobody.
You know, Rick, we could have made this arrest earlier in the evening at the Blue Parrot, but out of my high regard for you we are staging it here. It will amuse your customers.
I see. And what's Strasser doing here? He certainly didn't come all the way to Casablanca to witness a demonstration of your efficiency.
How observant you are. As a matter of fact, I wanted to give you a word of advice.
Yeah? Have a brandy?
Thank you. Rick, there are many exit visas sold in this cafe, but we know that you have never sold one. That is the reason we permit you to remain open.
I thought it was because we let you win at roulette.
That is another reason. There is a man who's arrived in Casablanca on his way to America. He will offer a fortune to anyone who will furnish him with an exit visa.
Yeah? What's his name?
Victor Laszlo.
Rick, that is the first time I have ever seen you so impressed.
Well, he's succeeded in impressing half the world.
It is my duty to see that he doesn't impress the other half. Rick, Laszlo must never reach America. He stays in Casablanca.
It'll be interesting to see how he manages.
Manages what?
His escape.
Oh, but I just told you. --
-- Stop it. He escaped from a concentration camp and the Nazis have been chasing him all over Europe.
This is the end of the chase.
Is that a serious offer?
I just paid out twenty. I'd like to get it back.
Make it ten. I am only a poor corrupt official.
Okay.
Done. No matter how clever he is, he still needs an exit visa, or I should say, two.
Why two?
He is traveling with a lady.
He'll take one.
I think not. I have seen the lady. And if he did not leave her in Marseilles, or in Oran, he certainly won't leave her in Casablanca.
Maybe he's not quite as romantic as you are.
It doesn't matter. There is no exit visa for him.
Louis, whatever gave you the impression that I might be interested in helping Laszlo escape?
Oh, laugh if you will, but I happen to be familiar with your record. Let me point out just two items. In 1935 you ran guns to Ethiopia. In 1936, you fought in Spain on the Loyalist side.
And got well paid for it on both occasions.
The winning side would have paid you much better.
Maybe. Well, it seems you are determined to keep Laszlo here.
I have my orders.
Yeah, you were saying?
Oh, how do you do?
That makes Rick a citizen of the world.
Well, you were asking about Rick and here he is. Mademoiselle, may I present --
Oh, no, Rick never --
Oh, it's my party.
Well, Ricky. I'm very pleased with you. Now you're beginning to live like a Frenchman.
Well, I told Strasser he wouldn't find the letters here. But I told my men to be especially destructive. You know how that impresses Germans?  Rick, have you got these letters of transit?
Louis, are you pro-Vichy or Free French?
Serves me right for asking a direct question. The subject is closed.
Well, it looks like you're a little late.
So Yvonne's gone over to the enemy.
As I suspected, you're a rank sentimentalist.
Yeah? Why?
Why do you interfere with my little romances?
Put it down as a gesture to love.
How can you close me up? On what grounds?
But you haven't any actual proof, and you know it. This isn't Germany or occupied France. All you can do is fine him a few thousand francs and give him thirty days. You might as well let him go now.
Ricky, I'd advise you not to be too interested in what happens to Laszlo. If by any chance you were to help him escape --
-- What makes you think I'd stick my neck out for Laszlo?
Because one, you've bet ten thousand francs he'd escape. Two, you have the letters of transit, now don't bother to deny it. And, well, you might do it simply because you don't like Strasser's looks. As a matter of fact, I don't like him either.
Well, they're all excellent reasons.
Don't count too much on my friendship, Ricky. In this matter I'm powerless. Besides, I might lose ten thousand francs.
You're not very subtle, but you are effective. I, I get the point. Yes, I have the letters, but I intend using them myself. I'm leaving Casablanca on tonight's plane, the last plane.
Huh?
And I'm taking a friend with me. One you'll appreciate.
What friend?
Ilsa Lund.  That ought to put your mind to rest about my helping Laszlo escape. The last man I want to see in America.
Ilsa is Laszlo's wife. She probably knows things that Strasser would like to know. Louis, I'll make a deal with you. Instead of this petty charge you have against him, you can get something really big, something that would chuck him in a concentration camp for years. That would be quite a feather in your cap, wouldn't it?
It certainly would. Germany... Vichy would be very grateful.
I'll arrange to have Laszlo come there to pick up the letters of transit, and that'll give you the criminal grounds on which to make the arrest. You get him, and we get away. To the Germans that last will be just a minor annoyance.
There's still something about this business I don't quite understand. Miss Lund, she's very beautiful, yes, but you were never interested in any woman.
I see. How do I know you'll keep your end of the bargain?
I'll make the arrangements right now with Laszlo in the visitor's pen.
Ricky, I'm going to miss you. Apparently you're the only one in Casablanca who has even less scruples than I.
Oh, thanks.
You're late.
I was informed just as Laszlo was about to leave the hotel, so I knew I'd be on time.
I thought I asked you to tie up your watchdogs.
You know, this place will never be the same without you, Ricky.
Yes, I know what you mean, but I've already spoken to Ferrari. You'll still win at roulette.
I have the letters right here.
Tell me, when we searched the place, where were they?
Sam's piano.
-- Not so fast, Louis. Nobody's going to be arrested. Not for a while yet.
Have you taken leave of your senses?
I have. Sit down over there.
I suppose you know what you're doing, but I wonder if you realize what this means?
I do. We've got plenty of time to discuss that later.
Call off your watch-dogs you said.
Just the same, you call the airport and let me hear you tell them. And remember, this gun's pointed right at your heart.
If you don't mind, you fill in the names. That will make it even more official.
You think of everything, don't you?
Well I was right. You are a sentimentalist.
What you just did for Laszlo, and that fairy tale that you invented to send Ilsa away with him. I know a little about women, my friend. She went, but she knew you were lying.
Anyway, thanks for helping me out.
I suppose you know this isn't going to be pleasant for either of us, especially for you. I'll have to arrest you of course.
Well, Rick, you're not only a sentimentalist, but you've become a patriot.
Maybe, but it seemed like a good time to start.
It might be a good idea for you to disappear from Casablanca for a while. There's a Free French garrison over at Brazzaville. I could be induced to arrange a passage.
My letter of transit? I could use a trip. But it doesn't make any difference about our bet. You still owe me ten thousand francs.
And that ten thousand francs should pay our expenses.
Our expenses?
Uh huh.
Where were you last night?
That's so long ago, I don't remember.
Will I see you tonight?
Give me another.
Sacha, she's had enough.
Rick, I'm sick and tired of having you --
Come on, we're going to get your coat.
Make it official, if you like.
What is your nationality?
I understand you came here from Paris at the time of the occupation.
There seems to be no secret about that.
Are you one of those people who cannot imagine the Germans in their beloved Paris?
Well, there are certain sections of New York, Major, that I wouldn't advise you to try to invade.
Aha. Who do you think will win the war?
Are my eyes really brown?
You will forgive my curiosity, Mr. Blaine. The point is, an enemy of the Reich has come to Casablanca and we are checking up on anybody who can be of any help to us.
My interest in whether Victor Laszlo stays or goes is purely a sporting one.
In this case, you have no sympathy for the fox, huh?
Not particularly. I understand the point of view of the hound, too.
You'll excuse me, gentlemen. Your business is politics. Mine is running a saloon.
I would advise you not to interfere.
Hello?
Put that phone down!
Get me the Radio Tower!
Uh, excuse me, please. Hello, Rick.
Huh. You know, Rick, watching you just now with the Deutsches Bank, one would think you'd been doing this all your life.
Well, what makes you think I haven't?
Oh, nothing. But when you first came to Casablanca, I thought --
May I? Too bad about those two German couriers, wasn't it?
They got a lucky break. Yesterday they were just two German clerks. Today they're the 'Honored Dead'.
Thank you.  Will you have a drink with me please?
No.
I forgot. You never drink with...  I'll have another, please.  You despise me, don't you?
If I gave you any thought, I probably would.
But why? Oh, you object to the kind of business I do, huh? But think of all those poor refugees who must rot in this place if I didn't help them. That's not so bad. Through ways of my own I provide them with exit visas.
For a price, Ugarte, for a price.
But think of all the poor devils who cannot meet Renault's price. I get it for them for half. Is that so parasitic?
I don't mind a parasite. I object to a cut-rate one.
Well, Rick, after tonight I'll be through with the whole business, and I am leaving finally this Casablanca.
Who did you bribe for your visa? Renault or yourself?
One moment. Tonight I'll be selling those for more money than even I have ever dreamed of, and then, addio Casablanca! You know, Rick, I have many friends in Casablanca, but somehow, just because you despise me you're the only one I trust. Will you keep these for me? Please.
For how long?
Perhaps an hour, perhaps a little longer.
I don't want them here overnight.
Rick! Rick, help me!
Don't be a fool. You can't get away.
Sam, Ferrari wants you to work for him at the Blue Parrot.
I like it fine here.
He'll double what I pay you.
Yeah, but I ain't got time to spend the money I make here.
Boss!
Yeah?
Boss, ain't you going to bed?
Ain't you planning on going to bed in the near future?
No.
You ever going to bed?
No.
Well, I ain't sleepy either.
Good. Then have a drink.
No. Not me, boss.
Then don't have a drink.
Boss, let's get out of here.
No, sir. I'm waiting for a lady.
Please, boss, let's go. Ain't nothing but trouble for you here.
She's coming back. I know she's coming back.
We'll take the car and drive all night. We'll get drunk. We'll go fishing and stay away until she's gone.
Shut up and go home, will you?
They grab Ugarte and she walks in. Well, that's the way it goes. One in, one out. Sam?
Yeah, boss?
Sam, if it's December 1941 in Casablanca, what time is it in New York?
Uh, my watch stopped.
What's that you're playing?
Just a little something of my own.
Well, stop it. You know what I want to hear.
No, I don't.
You played it for her and you can play it for me.
Well, I don't think I can remember it.
If she can stand it, I can. Play it!
This sort of takes the sting out of being occupied, doesn't it, Mr. Richard?
And getting closer every minute. Here. Drink up. We'll never finish the other three.
Where is she? Have you seen her?